the prospect of war  in ukraine in the year 2022 by which we  mean an escalation of a war that has  been ongoing since the year 2014.  the prospect of a new or expanded war in  ukraine is interesting for one reason  and one reason only  and that is democracy  inasmuch as this war  can be construed to be about democracy  inasmuch as the people who support the  ukrainian side can think of themselves  as supporting democracy  against dictatorship against tyranny etc  to that extent  you've got a war that is at least  interesting  i just mentioned  it's very hard to be motivated to read  primary sources from political history  when you're looking at a continent  you're looking at an epoch you're  looking at a century you're looking at a  millennium in which there is absolutely  no democracy at all  you know i've worked on politics and  history of india southeast asia china  but even england you go back far enough  you're reading primary source documents  about political history in india and at  times there's just  democracy is not even thought of it's  just 100 pure top-down  theocratic monarchy and it's really of a  very little interest okay  the problem with ukraine is that it  really is not a simple cut and dried  case of the pro-democratic forces lined  up against the anti-democratic ones and  that's that's why i'm taking the time to  make this video now i could throw a  whole bunch of disclaimers here  you will note in the description of this  video  i have a shout out to my rival and  political enemy hassan [ __ ]  i think you know i don't hate haseon but  i mean obviously we're in different  parts of the food chain literally and  figuratively you know let me just say  that i have nothing in common  politically uh i have a shout out to  jimmy dore  there are a lot of people on the left  who uh  for untranslatable reasons  support vladimir putin vladimir putin  has this very strange status on the left  i would say similar to venezuela  where people make excuses for and  support venezuela without really knowing  why without really knowing what without  knowing what it is they're concealing or  what it is they're revealing  i remember only ever dealing with one of  these people face to face  once and i was horrified i was not  prepared for it at all i met a guy who  was a vegan activist face to face  and he basically  came out of the closet to me he admitted  and started talking to me about the  extent to which he wasn't he idolized  and supported vladimir putin and russia  present-day russia not communist russia  but russia as it is today and that he he  regarded russia and putin as doing  something positive in challenging and  opposing  american imperialism american democracy  is  mystifying it's difficult to understand  it's difficult to relate to but that is  a significant voice  on the left now you tell me why isn't it  a voice on the right why aren't  conservatives pro-putin why aren't the  right wing  you can right now deal with a lot of  reasons why would be the right wing and  not the left-wing supporting putin  including religion i.e christianity in  this case including supporting  christianity against islam supporting  christianity against  uh atheism  including homophobia right putin has a  very carefully defined position where  he's he's not homophobic but he is  opposed to homosexuality he's a  he's anti-gay but he's not quite going  all the way to homophobia yeah i'm not  saying this to vindicate him i'm i'm  pro-gay rights i'm a very pro-homosexual  person without being homosexual myself i  don't sympathize i'm just pointing out  in a parallel universe in a science  fiction universe in some other universe  it's easy to imagine it would be the  right wing in america or the right wing  in england that sees vladimir putin as a  positive symbol of the kind of society  they won't have i mean who the hell  thinks of russia as it exists today  russia today so to speak so it's the  name of a famous youtube channel about  russia today who thinks of russia today  as leftist or left-wing or socialist  it's it's a truly horrendous example of  of corrupt  capitalism crony capitalism um  you know with that being said  russia does still have some claim  to being democratic and that's  significant to the the topic of this  video  so look  understandably  since  joe biden came into office  we have been told again and again by the  mainstream press  that uh the possibility of russia  invading ukraine is in the future and  apparently possibly is today february  22nd 2022  apparently it's been declared today war  has been declared today in effect  according to the joe biden  administration's version of reality  there was absolutely  no retrospect  there is no hint of remorse or  reflection looking back to the obama  administration and the fact that  vladimir putin already did invade  ukraine already did annex large parts of  ukraine back when obama was in power not  not trump i mean trump there were some  small scuffles but really the red-hot  bullets were flying the really decisive  period was the obama  administration hmm  of all the people who might have  memories of what happened during the  obama administration who might have  regrets who might have a critical  perspective now in looking back at what  obama did right in order bob durham  joe biden  he's the most valuable witness to that  history imaginable nobody could know  more about what obama did right and what  obama did wrong than joe biden  apparently we're  we're not going to hear it so no the the  propaganda narrative presented by the  american press and i would note you know  i listen to news from japan  i listen to news from france  once in a while i get news from germany  uh the other nations of europe are not  comfortable with the joe biden narrative  you know i wouldn't say the japanese are  opposing it but there's sort of some  trepidation about buying into the  current propaganda narrative but the  propaganda narrative is that this is a  new  sudden problem  of russia invading ukraine not that this  is an invasion that took back took place  back in the year 2014 that it's been  ongoing and that in reality the people  of crimea and the people of a  significant portion of the land mass of  uh  donetsk and luhansk eastern ukraine that  these people have been living under  russian dominion for actually a long  period of time now  no retrospect even no looking back to  the obama administration you never once  here in the mainstream press under the  administration reflections on say the  last 200 years  of ukrainian history you never get  reflections on well what percentage of  the people  in the east of ukraine or in the south  of ukraine or in crimea specifically  what percentage those people  consider themselves ethnically russian  what percentage of them speak russian as  their first language their primary  language or their own language what  percentage of them  if  you had democracy  if they had a choice what percentage of  them would prefer to be a province of  russia rather than a province of ukraine  and there's a third option here what  percentage of them would prefer to have  a small independent country  like belarus  like former yugoslav republic some some  countries in europe are really tiny you  know there's no minimum size vatican  city you know  europe is full of uh small  principalities like this you know what  percentage of them would prefer maybe to  actually have an independent country  whether that be crimea diness luhansk or  the three of them together as one  country you know then it wouldn't be  that small crimea alone is is not that  small there is no capacity to reflect on  these things now why  because that erodes the narrative that  this is a very simple confrontation  between pro-democracy and anti-democracy  forces  there are a lot of  really important wars to be fought in  the world that genuinely are about  pro-democracy and anti-democracy forces  that are  really clear-cut  you got north korea and you got south  korea which side are you on i'm on the  pro-democracy side  and that makes me pro-american  imperialism very clear-cut for me  there's no ethical ambiguity there  whatsoever how about taiwan versus  communist china i kind of i dislike  taiwan  i really you know you guys may not know  me like that i'm really not biased in  paper of taiwan in many many ways i  don't sound weird i personally could  have a better quality of life living in  communist china than living in taiwan  and i would know i've tried i've lived  in both there are a lot of ways in which  i appreciate the accomplishments of the  government of china someone who's lived  there and studied it i can say good  things about china i could say bad  things with one but if you're talking  about democracy you know  i'm 100  on the side of taiwan zero percent of  the side of china it's a very clear  struggle for and against democracy now  again the other one me maybe you heard  of this  maybe you're back when the newspapers  were admitting it was a pro for some  reason we don't talk about hong kong  anymore  i wonder why i wonder why no one is  asking joe biden what he wants to do  about hong kong i wonder why i wonder  why that's none of the front page  newspaper  i wonder why cuba is not on the front  page joe biden just doesn't have any  interest in democracy in cuba again  completely one-sided when it comes to  cuba i support american imperialism i  support american democracy i oppose  dictatorship i oppose common completely  simple completely counter  what was that country where people were  dying in the streets  fighting for democracy uh what was it  yeah myanmar remember that uh uh uh how  many pages deep do i have to go in this  newspaper to find something about  myanmar and what your pilot's gonna do  ah for some reason  we only care about ukraine in 2022 this  is the only example of pro and  anti-democracy that that matters um  you know when you think about when you  think about central asia  when you think about the great chess  board of the world is it um  um  afghanistan  uzbekistan tajikistan you know what hmm  actually when you really start to think  of it  there are more and more places where you  are looking at a completely stark  struggle for the future of democracy  where it's very one-sided and where  america's role can be and should be to  clearly fight for  democracy and against dictatorship  another one is basically i mean turkey  in 2022 in any of the countries in north  africa that turkey is extending its  tendrils into extending its influence oh  yeah remember that island that used to  be part of greece and is now a separate  nation kupros  what if whatever happened to them you  know yeah whatever happened to the tiny  island of cyprus  if the united nations cares so much  about these things  oh i decided i wasn't going to let this  degenerate into a rant about the united  nations but but for some reason  nobody blames the united nations  billions of dollars are wasted on this  peace preserving institution the united  nations isn't this exactly what the  united nations is supposed to resolve  it's exactly what the united united  nations is supposed to avoid nobody i  mean  seriously the last time i looked at the  united nations own youtube channel  wasn't that long ago couple weeks ago  they were getting fewer views per video  than i do like they were getting so few  views per video and you can ask yourself  when was the last time you even saw  those united nations plenary sessions  being quoted on the mainstream music a  clip of it being it's very rare normally  when something really funny happens or  really crazy happens the north koreans  showed at somebody like something really  ridiculous happens but let me tell you  something every day  the u.n is covering the claims and  counter claims like on a minute scale  uh on this day a particular village in  donetsk russian soldiers crossed the  border and then the russians say oh  those weren't our soldiers those were  mercenaries who aren't in our employ you  know you get these real details hashed  out and you know so-called human rights  reports and all these things so look in  my opinion if you haven't heard this  before prepare to be shocked i believe  the u.n should be abolished entirely at  a minimum countries like the united  states and canada should quit the u.n  and kick it off there so i don't refuse  to be a part of it in any way but not  only is the u.n failing to make these  things better it actually makes them  worse but mysteriously just nobody talks  about this nobody's like nobody's like  well  don't worry it's in good hands the  united nations is going to solve the  problem  nobody says that about ukraine nobody  says that about myanmar nobody says  about hong kong  nobody says that and one of the examples  the un has been deeply involved in for  decades no one says that about the  turkish occupation of half of the island  of cyprus nobody expects that so what do  we expect of of the united nations okay  so look um  ukraine is interesting because it leads  us to question the future of democracy  and it leads us to questions  specifically and narrowly  the significance of fighting wars  for  democracy  now just in the last couple of years  since the year 2014  ukraine has tried to represent itself  as a  profoundly committed  pro-democratic nation  that is facing off against its  tyrannical  larger neighbor that russia is this you  know horrifying overbearing tyrannical  anti-democratic nation whereas ukraine  is a pro-democratic nation therefore  won't you please support ukraine you  have to have a bit of a long memory to  realize that before the year 2014 and  even during part of the year 2014  ukraine was really in the same situation  that belarus is today ukraine was one of  the most despised most corrupt uh  you know russian puppet states i mean  their relationship to russia was very  much of of mastered a servant now okay  you know  get into the details get into the weeds  yes there was some ukrainian nationalism  yes certainly there was some turmoil  within ukraine about to what extent they  were going to lean towards the west or  lean towards the east but you know it is  just not the case that ukraine was one  of our closest allies or one of the  nearest and dearest countries to western  europe let alone the united states of  america there wasn't any great warmth of  feeling on the other side now this does  not excuse what barack obama did  and look there's another point here  why should it be barack obama's problem  well what the [ __ ] did you think germany  was going to do about it what the [ __ ]  do you think france was going to do  about it i mean this is the reality that  we're living do you think angela merkel  was going to roll up her sleeves and say  not on my watch i'm not going to let  another crimean war happen  and angela merkel was going to go out  and call for a corps of volunteers and  go from town to town in southern germany  and say sign up your sons and daughters  fight and die for the motherland do you  think angela merkel was going to ring  the bell of war and say this is it this  is a time to take a stand for democracy  or even at a lower level than democracy  this is a time to take a stand for the  sovereignty and territorial integrity of  ukraine i'm going to address that in  just a moment because i do think it's  significant that those concepts of  sovereignty and the inviolability of  territorial integrity they're they are  not merely separable from democracy  they're quite separate from democracy  and sometimes the two are even  antithetical to one another you have to  deal with what matters more democracy or  an abstract notion of territorial  integrity and sovereignty that the  territory's drawn on a map and no one's  allowed to change that not even if you  have a referendum and 95 percent of  people say they don't like where the  borders are they want to change it right  like borders are supposed to be a tool  used by human beings kind of not the  other way around i  i grew up in canada you know  what is the future of quebec what is the  future of canada and what you know it's  just ridiculous to me to pretend that  territorial sovereignty is something  that exists  for millennia or even many centuries  without being amended or renegotiated  especially when you have democracy when  you have people being being able to to  vote on it so and so  anyway uh  ukraine in the year 2014 did not have  the status that it has now and it's it's  a carefully contrived status created  through propaganda messaging and you  know genuinely created through the the  political actions of the politic the  leaders of ukraine and all sorts of  ukrainian people so in the last couple  of years they have stuck out their necks  and they have fought and died in the  name of democracy and they have made  themselves into martyrs for democracy  but not too long ago back in 2014 it  would be just as ludicrous to talk about  ukraine this way as it would be to talk  about poland this way or even worse  places like belarus you know it's like  well what is you telling me belarus  represents democracy i mean  does does belarus have more or less  democracy than communist china like on a  scale of one to ten how democratic yeah  this  it was really a hopeless despised  corruptocracy that nobody wanted to  support does this excuse the decisions  made by barack obama no but it explains  it i just related to you how ridiculous  it would be to imagine angela merkel  going from town to town and ringing the  bell for war and recruiting people and  saying hey now is the time to be a hero  now's the time to stand up and fight and  die for the future of europe's eastern  frontier  but if not angela merkel who was  supposed to do it barack obama was kind  of tired of ringing his bell he had a  war in afghanistan he had a war in iraq  he had a war  it's hard to define geographically  against isis the islamic state and the  levant whatever you want to call it you  know he had war in syria he had multiple  wars in north africa he was involved in  you know including but not limited to  libya the war against boko haram so on  and so forth and as i recall you guys  can correct me if i'm wrong if i'm  slightly off on the timeline here i  believe he had already declared his  so-called pivot to asia  now  sorry if i'm wrong i should look up the  date when he first declared that if he  hadn't declared it he was in the phase  of wanting to declare it because he had  that plan in mind before he went public  with it now very briefly about barack  obama's pivot to asia  you could say one of two things either  one  it was a plan for a fundamental change  in american foreign policy that never  happened  or two it was a plan for amer change in  american foreign policy that did happen  but it happened when joe biden was  elected in joe biden's first week in  office or first couple months in office  that it was the change that that was to  change obama vision that time we don't  know  uh biden himself is not coming out and  saying that his foreign policy decisions  the same ones obama wanted to do but for  some reason just completely failed to  implement so that's you know but at any  rate obama was certainly  thinking about shifting to a posture of  treating china as america's main enemy  and not  these miscellaneous wars i've just  mentioned  obama failed to do that we don't know  why  why did obama never follow through with  the uh  so-called pivot to asia  which really can be glossed as the the  pivot to being anti-china now  this raises other interesting questions  that we don't need to get into in depth  here on this video  if china is your enemy  do you really want  russia to also  be your enemy  you know wouldn't wouldn't you prefer to  do what donald trump tried to do totally  incompetently don't get me wrong donald  trump was an idiot but donald trump  tried to embrace russia while making an  enemy of china wouldn't that be  profitable do you really want russia  and iran  and china to be your enemies  simultaneously and we can keep going  here it's a long list right well you  know what obama did about ukraine  in plain english jack [ __ ]  so obama let it happen should we blame  obama more than we blame  uh  you know the leader of france the leader  of germany the leader of england the you  know anyone the leader of switzerland  you know for real no one no one expects  the swiss to pick up the bag you know  there are a lot of other countries here  that are just geographically culturally  and economically closer to ukraine and i  think it does just reflect the overall  contempt  everyone had for ukraine when the euro  maidan protests began  um  nobody felt that ukraine was their  friend nobody felt they wanted to stand  up and fight and die for the future of  ukraine  so now we get back into the question  democracy  here's the problem  some percentage  of people in kiev  keith  how do we want to pronounce it some  percentage of people in the capital city  of ukraine  are willing to fight and die  for the future of  donetsk luhansk crimea to to maintain in  this sense  it's territorial integrity i don't know  what percentage that is  i don't know  and some percentage of people in the  capital city are willing to admit  look the vast majority of the residents  of  crimea do not want to be a part of  ukraine they either want to be a  separate country a small separate  country like belarus et cetera  estonia compare it to the size of  estonia you know  or  they want to be a province of russia  russia did hold a referendum that  everyone says was illegitimate and phony  and staged the referendum showed 95  of the population of uh crimea wanted to  be part of russia and ukraine  well  talk to experts  i even look at interviews with experts  nobody believes the number 95  what do you think the real number is is  it 75  it's a very high percentage in re  talk to anyone involved in this and also  kind of pay attention to the propaganda  messaging this is strangely not dealt  with and avoided a significant  percentage of just being a real deal i  have never heard anyone doubt that the  majority of the residents of crimea do  not want to be part of ukraine they  instead want to be part of russia or be  a separate country entirely but that  would be  in a very close dependent relationship  with russia that no doubt the vast  majority of the residents they want that  what percentage of the people  in donetsk what percentage of the people  in luhans  feel the same way  now what i hear  in the mainstream press and what i hear  directly from  national leaders you know  not just america england the leader of  ukraine himself  what i hear is an attempt to make this  an argument  about the inviability of  territorial claims and  sovereignty that you know  well  [Music]  if anyone tries to change the border of  any country if anyone tries to take one  country and put it into two parts or  three parts  that that is a crime against humanity  and has to be opposed  and they don't even mention the  possibility what if 85 percent of the  population want that what if it's 95  what if it's 75 so in canada this is  normal we have to deal with this in the  united states of america if you've ever  been to texas there are texans who will  tell you all the time we used to be a  separate country texan texas was not  always part of the united states of  america and we can be again texans  really hold it in their back pocket that  if they ever dislike american politics  enough they can secede they can become a  separate kind of medium-sized country  texans see it that way i'm not joking  and um  you know yeah territorial inviolability  and sovereignty  george w bush didn't have a whole lot of  imagination  um how do you think the war in  afghanistan would have gone  if it had been divided into about four  countries after it was conquered by the  united states about about four you can  get into it could be three could be five  but you know afghanistan has several  different languages in several different  ethnically distinct regions  really really afghanistan could have  split into a couple of different  countries and  there was certainly an argument that the  american foreign afghanistan would have  gone better with the attempts at  creating democracy in afghanistan would  have gone better i mean one of the  prerequisites of democracy especially  encountered with a low level of literacy  a low level of education can you  understand the language the politicians  are speaking can you actually read the  same newspaper or if you're illiterate  have someone else read out your life do  you have one radio service  it's a tough guy  so  you know this pretense that it's just  unthinkable that anything on the map  is going to be withdrawn going to be  redrawn  um  you know now especially in the case  of ukraine if you guys don't know the  term i do see your comments coming in  but guys if you have a second hit the  thumbs up button helps more people see  the video helps more people see the  video while i'm recording also helps  them discover it uh later but i do see  your comments coming in thanks sir  thanks for being here  um  look  i used to live in laos uh tiny country  in southeast asia just north of cambodia  just west of uh vietnam i used to live  in laos  and when i first got there i felt that  this was a tiny  poverty-stricken nation where the people  were so tough  that they had resisted being conquered  by thailand they had resisted being  conquered by france  which to some extent they were conquered  by but it's long story  you know and they had resisted being  conquered by the japanese again the  capital city was conquered by the  japanese long story  japanese army was there and did occupied  but anyway you know this is this long  history of resistance leading up to this  surreal war with the united states of  america where the poorest people in the  world were fighting the richest people  in the world jungle the jungle caves  they gave think wow these are these poor  you know just  backward illiterate people but they  fought so hard for their independence  they sought fought so hard to have you  know sovereignty self-determination and  this this to have this territory  this little piece of land you know  obviously i felt nothing could be worse  than to kind of say oh this country has  no no reason to exist at all like this  should just be another province of  thailand you know like in a weird sense  like i've done the reading i've done a  lot of historical research you know it  hurt me  now i was learning lotion at that time i  did get quite far in my ability to speak  read and write lotion and then i could  speak thai well enough this is the point  i'm getting to  you'd learn to kind of switch just a few  words and get by and tie  and thai people would be able to tell  they'd normally think you were married  to a lotion woman it's like oh you're  speaking thai but like your accent and a  few words here and there give away that  really the language you know is lotion  um  you know i encountered people in laos  who had the down-to-earth attitude look  there's no reason for this country to  exist there's just no reason for us to  be a separate independent country this  is ridiculous like we're locking  ourselves into poverty and as it happens  an anti-democratic horrible communist  dictatorial regime this is also true of  laos but like that there is really no  reason why laos shouldn't have the same  status than thailand that chiang mai has  been talent any of the culturally and  linguistically distinct units within  thailand and you know again at first  it's just kind of shocking to me  you learn the language more and more  and you start to realize the extent to  which the ocean  is a dialect of thai  or thai is a dialect of lotion i've  given you the word the term swadesh list  you can get the swadish list for thai  and laotian swedish it's just a type of  vocabulary list and it's used to  evaluate how different languages are or  how similar they are  whether this is scientific or not is  another question anthropologists like to  use this particular list of words okay  so look at the swatish list for thai the  swatish list for lotion consistently  transcribed into  the same phonetic notation you know so  that it's not just the style of writing  that's deceiving yourself words are  these are almost  the same  language  now no matter how much suffering there  has been in history up to this point no  matter how many wars they've fought how  much they've suffered and died okay so  now it's year 2022 do you want  to fight and die  for the future of the lotion language do  you want to fight a war do you want to  fight and struggle and die  for the minuscule difference between the  laotian language and the thai language  now we have another kind of problem here  because laos is anti-democratic and the  question becomes do you want to fight  and die for this horrible dictatorial  anti-democratic regime just to prevent  this country from being absorbed into  a more democratic one becoming a  province of a country where they would  have elections they would have freedom  of speech they would have some of these  benefits  thailand  thailand has political problems okay  it's not paradise you know it does but  when you're comparing it to a communist  dictatorship like laos  you know now this is not even getting  into the economic  aspect obviously look back at the last  50 years  there is no way to exaggerate how much  better off the people of laos would be  their quality of life their economic  position their level of education they  would be so much better off today in  every way if 50 years ago they had  become a province of talent if 100 years  ago they become worse there is no debate  about that none  right  so you know  the the unthinkable  starts to become thinkable  why does canada exist  why does quebec exist  you know and what are the real  disadvantages of canadian  independence you know what are the real  disadvantages of chemical independence i  used to live in scotland when i was a  kid uh about 12 13 years old i think i  think i turned 13 while i was in  scotland um it was there for more than a  year you know i went there for whatever  reason with this assumption that all  scottish people wanted to fight and die  to make scotland an independent country  again it was very hard for me to accept  that no the majority of scottish people  not the vast majority but the majority  know they preferred to be subordinate to  london england that there were things  that mattered more than independents  they didn't particularly want to have  their own country and have their own  army and have their own money have their  own currency they were fine just having  their own soccer team just having their  own football team because they'd say  there you know they were fine you know  having this limited symbolic kind of  independence and and being a part of a  larger unit so if you don't know in the  years since then the year since i was in  scotland they have had a lot of polling  but also outright referendums they've  had democratic votes they've had  plebiscites to ask the question of what  percentage of people want to be a  separate country anyway and a whole lot  of people say they'd rather be able to  ride a train continuously between you  know london and and glasgow  so that is the reality of the world we  live in all right it's just ridiculous  to pretend  that uh sovereignty  uh  uh territorial integrity that these are  permanent inviolable non-negotiable  concepts  [Music]  i'm going to come back to the swadesh  list  i defy you take a swaddash list  of the russian language this is a list  of vocabulary put it next to the swatish  list for ukrainian  all right  ukrainian and russian are different  languages  but they are so similar  you could be excused for saying  ukrainian is a dialect of russian or  russian is a dialect  of ukrainian  the difference between the thai language  and the lotion language  same same  um  do you  want to fight and die  for ukrainian nationalism  not just  you would you sign up to fight that army  because of the abstract idea of  ukrainian nationals  and not ukrainian nationalism for people  in the capital city kiev or kiev  not  to defend parts of ukraine where perhaps  the majority of people want to continue  being this independent country ukraine  but to impose  ukrainian nationalism  over crimea  an area where we are all absolutely  certain the majority of people do not  want to be part of ukraine  currently  this is not a problem in canada  but it could be in future  it could be for quebec  and it could be for some of our first  nations people you could have a  territorial area where the indigenous  people say look they really don't want  to do this canadian thing anymore they  want to be a separate country i know we  can roll tanks we can go conquer them  and force them to be part of our country  but if you believe in democracy and it's  a question of how much like how local  does democracy get what if there are  some indigenous people in canada and  they would prefer to be a small country  like uh  andorra and dora has a tiny country they  say look it would mean so much to us  we're really committed to this we really  even if it locks us into poverty and we  have all these disadvantages we'd rather  be a tiny country like andorra than be  part of this canada thing anymore  well do you respect that how does you  know  if the only justification  for war in ukraine now  is that it is pro-democracy we all need  to think much more profoundly and  seriously  about what being pro-democracy really  means  so yeah uh someone's asking if i'm still  cooking this thing behind me or if it's  going to burn great question  right and see that flatbreads  [Laughter]  oh  so do you want to give me lucas a  regular commentator says quote what i  found interesting is that nobody talks  about the last five years  yeah yeah yeah  yeah well i think earlier on i mentioned  that it's just very suspicious that we  don't want to discuss this in a  retrospective framework of going back to  the obama administration it's always in  forever narrowed down to this very phony  very short-term  uh set of reflections okay  now look guys um  great question from the audience quote  when's the last time you had caffeine  yeah thanks  do you think i look higher do you think  i look low  i should do i should do a caffeine  update video this is true  uh  yeah i have not had coffee in many days  i had a small amount of chocolate today  uh truth be told so chocolate does  contain caffeine but i am i am off  caffeine at the moment thank you for  asking my life is in many ways a  long-term struggle against caffeine but  you know sometimes to try to get my try  to jolt my sleep cycle back on schedule  or for other reasons especially if i've  been sick even just the common cold i  like to use caffeine to compensate so  good  hard-hitting questions from the audience  um  you know war  for  democracy  right  in myanmar you have a very  straightforward situation  where the majority of the people  want democracy and are saying wouldn't  you please conquer us so we can have it  this has its own moral quandaries has  some real serious moral problems  conquering a people  in the name of democracy when they do  want democracy  i i'm just being real with you  what percentage of cuba  want democracy i don't know you know  like i could i could hear  i  is it 30  is it 80  some percentage of people in cuba want  democracy  do they want it enough to stand up and  fight and die  do they want it enough to be passively  conquered by the american army if the  american people are willing to fight and  die on their behalf right you know it's  uh  it's it's very tough sorry so do you do  you want to give me says quote speaking  from a country with four official  languages in my opinion compromises are  essential so this is switzerland  definitely romance was artificially  created as a compromise between values  so you have standardized form of the the  romance language  um  yeah in reality switzerland that's like  six official languages you know i know  there's more than one account if you  look at the number of languages that are  taught in schools and supported by the  government as official languages it's  it's more than four  six or seven but yeah switzerland is  very big on  on language education and look  let's be real  i am not idealistic enough to say  that afghanistan  can be  switzerland i'm just not you know like  like the fact that that's possible in  switzerland doesn't mean it's possible  in afghanistan and you know i don't  it's so easy to preach virtue to the  yugoslavians right well yugoslavia  couldn't do it yugoslavia couldn't be a  switzerland in that sense it couldn't be  like switzerland and i i just think it's  unreasonable to to take switzerland i  mean switzerland is a positive example  in many many ways but to take that and  then look at the rest of the world and  say well why can't you guys all  reorganize ourselves into swiss  republics uh that is asking a lot it's  certainly asking a lot of of afghanistan  um anyway look to just kind of close the  circle there it's one thing to talk  about conquering myanmar  with the hypothesis or the assumption  that the people of myanmar would like to  be conquered would like to be a  democracy and would accept  uh conquest as the price of becoming a  democracy all right  well  right now what percentage of the people  of crimea  want  the americans to bomb them  if you could do a poll without any  russian interference you know i mean if  you could do a real  you know you could have a magical  perfect poll  you know where nobody feels any pressure  and no you know where people are really  ask their sincere opinion to think about  it and they know the answer is going to  have real world consequences you know  i think there are some people in north  korea who would say in a poll yes they  wish the americans would conquer north  korea to end this dictatorship some  is it 10 is it 50 there are some people  in north korea who would say look this  regime is so terrible  i wish the americans would conquer us so  we could just reunify with south korea  some okay  uh  there are probably some people in cuba  who feel that way how many people really  right now in russian occupied crimea  how many of them  would support  an american invasion an american  conquest of crimea  if you had polling if you had a  referendum i think everyone in this  audience knows and everyone who works  for the cia knows and everyone with any  shred of expertise knows the answer is  very close to zero  there are almost zero people there will  be a few dissidents  to a few people who feel that vladimir  putin's regime is so terrible that it's  worth  a nuclear war to get rid of putin there  are but there will be more people  certainly in the crimea certainly in  donetsk and luhans there will be people  who feel that they are russian  that their language is russian that  their long-term future is being a part  of russia not ukraine  and they probably feel that the  dictatorship of putin  electoral dictatorship is like the  strongman government of putin the  corrupt  quasi-democratic government of putin as  bad as it is  it will prove to be evanescent sooner or  later putin will retire sooner or later  he will die of old age and then without  any revolution we hope without any civil  war  russia will be able to progress toward  being a country that is more like  belgium it's just going to be more of a  western democratic style  country that the  the norms that the hope is that after  putin dies or after putin retires that  they will not go further down the  slippery slope to becoming like north  korea or uh becoming like some of the  central asian republics some of these  horrible dictatorships that instead  once putin has finished his you know  memorable career as the dictator of  russia that russia will you know have a  government much more like france germany  belgium uh those normal standards so  that's a different kind of sacrifice  right that would be people in ukraine  and people in sorry  people in donetsk people in luhansk  people in  uh the crimea who are willing to endure  a number of years or maybe a number of  decades do you think putin has 20 years  left really is it 10 years is it just  five see it's not that many years it's  not like you're enduring stalinism it's  not that long they say well we can  tolerate being conquered and occupied by  putin  imagining that a better regime you know  is is going to replace him and from a  completely uh cynical perspective  you know  um  i i think that is the basis for donald  trump's style optimism about russia  donald trump style attempts to embrace  russia is that russia is very different  from north korea russia is very  different from iran russia is different  from pakistan russia is different from  you know the current government of  afghanistan you know the taliban and so  on russia is very different from isis  that there isn't really any fundamental  basis for the enmity russia is a country  that  could be and should be our ally could be  and should be our friend  but uh  just due to this one  tin pot dictator just due to vladimir  putin temporarily it isn't and  is it reckless optimism to think that  without a nuclear war without a civil  war without a revolution putin can be  replaced and russia can return to some  of the norms of western democracy  so let's let's really get into this  caffeine thing i didn't have coffee  today i didn't have coffee yesterday  day before yesterday did i have coffee  i think maybe was the day before that i  think this might be my fourth day  with no caffeine so you still  are you're still here scare bear  i answered your quest  but yeah i do i do periodically struggle  with uh with quitting caffeine  and um  you know it's a struggle is a struggle  worth having i was talking to one of my  neighbors the other day i won't say who  but just someone else who lives in this  apartment building  i think he's younger than me i think  he's like 10 years younger than me you  know you know i'm thinking about  he was just chatting with me in the hall  and you know i do struggle with physical  fitness i struggle with doing 200  push-ups a day and i struggle with  quitting caffeine and i i honestly i  cannot say i struggle with sobriety i've  been sober for so long it's easy that's  not a struggle for me at all i can't say  i struggle with a vegan diet and i've  been vegan for so long it's not a  struggle at all you know  but you know  i'd rather have those struggles than  than not have them  and i wish i could say when i meet guys  my own age normally i'm meeting guys 10  years younger than me who look like  they're 10 years older than me and  they're they're losing all those same  struggles i think it's fair to say just  just the last couple weeks i've  struggled with video games you know i  hadn't played video games in a long time  i got into uh as i made a video talking  about i got into buying  video games for the 3ds before it closes  it's not where this one is video game  platform and it's going out of business  the store is being shut down it's like  okay are there any games i want to buy  before this is gone forever i got into  really questioning you know which  version of pac-man do i want to know not  even that i want to play pac-man today  but that at some point in the future and  you feel that coming into your life and  kind of taking up more space in your  head and your emotional range and on the  other hand you have things to deal with  that are really heartbreaking and hard  to deal with  my divorce  talking to a lawyer but when i'm going  to see my daughter  where i'm living where i'm going to move  to what i'm going to do with my own  studies in my own career and the final  steps in finishing  the first book i've written first book  for adults no more manifestos i have  been doing that including clicking on  the website so when you're making the  book some of it's really boring  formatting stuff um  you know dealing with the book is  stressful and then i started writing  another book if you guys support my  video and i started writing a new book  and you know feeling the  simplicity and childlike wonder of video  games coming back in your life which  again really has been part of my life i  was joking with melissa about this  at one point um  uh  you know melissa bought me a pac-man  game it's not worth describing but it  was a self-contained what's called a  plug-and-play  pac-man game and you know i did thank  her and i guess look it's thoughtful i  know you bought this for me but i  refused it i said look you know do you  still have the receipt i really think  you should return this because i'm not  gonna use it that's true at that time i  didn't even play i didn't even play  pac-man  and um when melissa and i first got  together the only game i played was  space invaders the original space  invaders and i do i recently i bought a  copy of space invaders if i ever want to  play i haven't been playing it and  played over five minutes but i do own  space in america again these kinds of  very very simple games you can just play  for five minutes here and there you know  reporting off but i said i said melissa  look it's so ironic you you actually  bought me as a gift that that pac-man  and i i told you to return it i was  again i was nice about it i didn't say  oh how could you possibly you know here  we are like four years later three years  later it's many years later and if i you  know if i had that you know i'd really  uh i'd really love it like oh wow great  at least i have this you know what flip  back then so yeah yeah cause i've been  going through that lately but anyway  yeah you know it's um  you know i'm saying this stuff out loud  too because i've had a lot of fan mail  lately  just just be honest  fan mail isn't uh equally distributed  over there sometimes within a couple  days i've gotten familiar with people  who really admire me and they don't see  the way in which my life is a struggle  and they don't see the way in which my  life is a failure so i really think it's  important that i take the time to come  out and say look guys this is a struggle  to feel like this is hard  not to be self-pitying not even to  complain  but um  i think part of the reality of  uh performance art  is that the performer makes the  performance seem easy you know i'm  coming on here and i'm joking about this  uh this is the first video i've ever  done about ukraine i don't think the  other maybe it's been mentioned very  briefly in passing  uh but you know how many hours of  reading have i done about ukraine  between 2014 and present and even how  many hours have i spent just talking to  melissa just talking to my girlfriend  about  i mean you know sir but if you actually  tried to add it up i mean like i say to  people like add up the number of hours  you're spending playing video games like  if you actually had a tally now in that  sense you know a lot goes into it and  what you see is this very casual and  joyous thing and you don't maybe  perceive you know this is someone who  struggles to not drink caffeine  the reason being what i like about  coffee is it lets me get a lot of work  done that's what's appealing it's not  that it makes me happy you're like okay  i can drink caffeine and then put 110 of  my energy into this that's what's  appealing about it especially if you've  had a bad night's sleep or you've had a  cold you've been sick something like  that you're ill-rested it's very  appealing if somebody wants to wants to  get things done  to say look i struggle with that and i  struggle with the fact i keep saying to  people again and again look i have no  employment i have no hope of employment  all of my hopes for education have come  to an end you know so i don't have to  rehearse it here but there were a series  of university programs and college  programs i was looking at trying to get  into and now all of them are over i kind  of have this brief distraction and  buckling down and finishing writing the  book  but then after i'm finished writing the  book or these two books plural you know  there's this kind of chasm of what am i  going to do with my life and if you keep  watching the youtube channel you'll  you'll get to see that  okay a couple more uh questions here  wicked energy who's a regular viewer uh  shout out to wicked energy i hope that's  not the name of a of a caffeine-filled  drink that i'm endorsing i hope  i think that's just this guy's username  sounds like it could be a could be an  energy drink says uh quote isil can you  comment on if you think nato is is over  expanding oh okay so sir the question is  is is nato gonna expand further you know  basically what's the future of of nato  look um  in reality  the united states and turkey are enemies  this whole thing with russia has been a  distraction from the extent to which  the united states and turkey today  are enemies so the most likely thing  that will happen with nato in the future  is that it will shrink  it can't shrink legally so what it will  probably do is overnight you'll have a  you'll have a meeting  and uh  the members will be  brought together  and you know nato will be dissolved and  then they'll form a new a new uh  agency to replace it a new military  alliance to replace it so you have two  huge problems right now one is turkey  and the other is india  so today in 2022 under joe biden nato  makes no sense at all  nato is a nonsensical  what's the word  nato is a vestige of a bygone political  era if nato made sense when jfk was  president it barely made sense and kind  of good luck trying to reason through  how nato got to the membership list it  has today the status of turkey nato but  obviously the real alliance that america  needs to be a part of and set in stone  is an alliance that includes india  and taiwan  and japan  and that excludes turkey  so i wondered if  you know during his first hundred days  in office or something if  biden was going to make a move of that  kind but apparently not or apparently  not yet  now  look um  so that's the big game for nato  right  if you're going to dissolve nato and  start a new  agency a new security agency a new  treaty a new a new military alliance  is it in america's interest  to be arming  small powerless eastern european  countries against russia  not really  you know what is in america's interest  in central asia  including afghanistan but not  limited to afghanistan what is america's  policy on mongolia  mongolia if you don't know  has an enormous border with russia  and on the other side has an enormous  border with china  mongolia is a crucial strategic ally  and you triangulate to mongolia and  japan you know the army base in  in okinawa you know  uh  there were very very serious decisions  to be made there with serious long-term  implications  but  you know nato as it exists today with  turkey at the center of it  um  it is a vestige of a  of a bygone era so i i can't see any  other future for nato other than it  being dissolved and quite possibly on  the same day ceremonially you have you  know america has a meeting with the  countries that they want to be a part of  the new agency to replace nato and they  all sign a declaration or sign a  document  um  and then in some ways it carries on  so yeah anyway great some so just couple  more comments and i'll wrap it up  sleepyhead says quote i struggle with  depression you look so happy and your  girlfriend as well  that is because i love life you know and  you know i'm just being real with you i  think i'd be happy in prison i think i'd  be happy in the army you know if i could  join the army i'm too old you know i  think i'd be happy  uh working a very humble job in an  amazon warehouse which may be coming  next tune in for season three of a  balaccio where i'm working on an amazon  warehouse you know  my future there is no  possibility of me getting  good or high-paying employment i may  have very very humble hard jobs in the  future but you know i am i look happy  because i am happy  and that's because i'm leading a  meaningful life all the time  and put it this way even if i'm not  leading a meaningful life  i'm struggling to lead a meaningful life  all the time and that struggle is is  worth having and that struggle  it makes you happy you know even when  your life is terrible even when your  life is miserable even when you want to  break down crying because you don't know  when you're going to see your daughter  you know and you're only getting bad  news  from your lawyer and you're only getting  bad news from the different government  agencies you're trying to do paperwork  with you know sure i mean there are a  lot of things about that are very  obviously tragic  and if you go back and look  um season three will be the wage slave  arc  well said well said the return to the  workplace foreign totally totally and i  can come on wearing my mcdonald's  uniform i look that'll be great for me  that'll be a fun form of content to do  you know yeah  come in and talk about what life is like  at mcdonald's do some real kind of dark  dark humor about that i can i can see  that that coming for sure  um  yeah anyway sorry but you know that  that's that's a struggle worth worth  having and um you know i i think you  guys get the message if you watch my  videos lately in large part i'm out here  trying to encourage people to embrace  that struggle rather than embrace  distractions from the struggle or do not  you know and uh face up to what's making  you unhappy and and so on and so forth  sure  uh so a couple more specific questions  here  question uh  what do you do about russia or slash  putin especially financially since not  militarily and what's what does putin do  next so look guys i i kind of thought  about saying this before  um it's it's very different when you're  in a position of power versus a position  of powerlessness so i'm not going to  digress into a lecture on this although  i could  thumbs up if you want a lecture on it  give the video a thumbs up anyway  you've been watching for 57 minutes give  it a thumbs up  when we talk about veganism vegan  politics animal rights what do you want  to say ethics ecology  global warming any of those issues  99 of what i'm saying is from the  position of powerless people trying to  change the world it's it's really  kind of stupid and self-indulgent to sit  here and say oh what would i do if i  were the president of the united states  about ecology about animal rights about  you know the golden rule  now we can  have that conversation but it's the two  are so far removed right so just just  making the disclaimer most of what i  talk about is from the perspective of an  isolated intellectual a powerless person  trying to change the world in some way  and that's why i do ask questions you'll  notice in the middle of this discourse  by ukraine i asked you to think would  you sign up to fight in this war would  you be willing to fight for the future  of ukraine and you know would you be  willing to fight for the future of laos  in a war between laos and thailand just  because of the abstract  concept of territorial sovereignty right  self-determination these are these are  questions worth thinking through because  it situates you in that historical  period in that struggle you know  um where there's something your own life  is at risk ultimately but at least at  least a few years your life arrests a  lot a lot of misery and discomfort and  hard work  but that is again thinking of you as a  powerless person it's very very  different if we were to talk about this  in terms of what you would do if you  were if you had been in donald trump's  position during that period of time i  have to say  i think it would be very tempting for  the united states  for canada for england  to say look  we fundamentally embrace russia 110  to say that they support russia in its  conquest of syria  that's what happened guys in case you  didn't notice  uh that just admit that actually it's  kind of politically convenient for the  rest of the world to just allow russia  to militarily stabilize some parts of  africa some parts of the middle east and  that actually that's kind of in the  interest of of western businesses  they're not really our enemies because  russia also massacres members of isis  they also suppress you know muslim  jihadist extremist insurgency and so on  and to say look fundamentally  north korea is our enemy and china is  our enemy and cuba is our enemy but  really not russia like really this is  kind of stupid guys and to embrace  russia 110  and say look we're going to start a  whole new chapter of history in russian  relations  donald trump  kind of hinted at that possibility but  never really went all the way with it  you could say he wimped out but you  could you could totally uh you know  again whether you think of that as  idealistic or cynical  and you could say look  you know the temperament of just one man  should not decide the fate of nations  if vladimir putin is not our type of guy  uh but you know the russian people  really are our type of we have no  problem with the russians you know as  the people they're really not our  enemies there's no reason to escalate  this conflict  and it certainly i mean just point out  if you were in a position of power you  could 100 embrace russia  you cannot embrace turkey it's  impossible  you  cannot embrace iran  it's impossible you know iran is really  your enemy whether you like it or not i  mean what you're going to do about iran  that's tough what you're gonna do about  turkey that's tough this is really  really difficult stuff what are you  gonna do about libya  you know  but the whole thing with russia um  there really is a glasnost approach  that's possible here  unfortunately  one  history has been left totally in the  hands of the american president as they  say angela merkel wasn't going to do  [ __ ] what you know angela merkel isn't  going to make she didn't do anything  neither is macron now you know emmanuel  macron prime minister france  none of these other people are actually  going to take any initiative so it rests  entirely on the president united states  well look who the president the united  states has been george w bush barack  obama  donald trump and now you know  so  yeah from the level of elite politics  and the level of of being in power  that's possibility but from the  perspective of powerless people which is  what i mostly talk about of course we  should be 100 opposed to vladimir putin  and we should support democracy we  should support democracy and oppose  any kind of tyranny any kind of  non-democratic government whether that  is in myanmar whether that is in  communist china or whether that is in  russia  nice talking to you guys  when you look back at the last five  years of your life what have you done  for democracy  really ask yourself  that question you know i'm gonna let's  get a little bit more personal  when you look at your own father  and the last 50 years of his life  what has he  ever done for democracy  look at your husband look at your wife  whatever you got boyfriend girlfriend  in the last five years  what have you ever done for democracy  and now look ahead to the next five  years  and don't tell me but really think about  it  really think in the next five years  what are you  going to do for democracy whether that  is in switzerland germany ukraine  myanmar hong kong taiwan  or in one state or another within  the united states  of america